## Artful Pain and Painful Art: Transformation of Awareness

the lives of many artists have been filled with various sufferings that raise several questions for us: Is the creation of art merely derived from beauty and goodness? What is the role of human suffering in his creativity? Frida Kahlo, a Mexican painter whose life, after a bus crash, was accompanied by physical pain and a wheelchair until her death, writes in her latest diary: “I hope the exit is joyful and I hope never to return.” It is as if a group of artists, whose works usually have their inherent character as a signature inside, have been involved in a recurring cycle. It is as if they have gone from a certain kind of awareness to experiencing pain (not just physically), and art, the result of what has happened to them, has been a step toward greater awareness of themselves and their audience.

However, what are the features of awareness that can lead to pain? Awareness simply means knowing ourselves and our knowledge of ourselves, other people, and objects. For example, if we are suffering from an illness, we are well aware that it is “we” who is in pain, not anyone else. It is clear that we are doing this without thinking. Awareness means knowing that we exist and are sure of our existence. From childhood, over time, we build a model of the world in which we live and then, relying on it, a model of ourselves that is defined within our worldview. Also, awareness is relative and in some cases has an inner aspect that encompasses our inner states and emotions; And sometimes it has an external element that includes our external perception, so the meaning of awareness in all this writing is relative awareness. When the man reaches a high level of awareness, that is, when he recognizes truths and facts and realizes them without deceiving or lying to his mind, he will step into the realm of self-consciousness, the boundaries of which are far beyond the perfection of consciousness. The result of this self-awareness is the complete free will and freedom of the human mind, and this freedom prevents one’s self-deception and self-censorship. Suppose a human being born with the temperament of creating and producing art attacks himself with key and challenging questions and seeks answers with intellectual and personality honesty. In that case, he will reach a certain level of awareness, and in the cycle mentioned earlier, he leads to pain.

If a person is armed with awareness, why doesn’t he avoid the pain? The answer to this question must be sought in the contradiction between the world’s reality and his thoughts. His mental world, after awareness, is very different from the real world, which causes the person to be indecisive in his choices and decisions, and often, hesitation leads to excessive thinking on issues and concerns that cause many thinking errors as a result. The aware person constantly feels separated, separated from society, other people, his living environment, and everything incompatible with his mental ideal. They usually feel like they do not belong in their current position. Moreover, the lack of meaningful social relationships can turn them into isolated and indrawn human beings. They also have different levels of concern with popular culture and the prevailing fashions of society, and even if they engage in them or try to enjoy them, they will never accept it deeply by their heart.

All of the above reasons, with different effects, cause pain to a person. The pain we are talking about stems from aware thinking and is a kind of “mental pain.” Pain is an emotional reaction and a physical or mental warning through which our mind expresses its distress about something unpleasant, such as an illness or a rift in thoughts. The two leading causes of the pain are physical and psychological factors. Psychological pain is a mental experience, which is why we call it mental pain. Mental pain is intangible and invisible and can be easily covered with chemicals or drugs. Still, it is so much harder to treat than physical pain, a type of pain that is visible and often controllable or treatable.

There is a variety of perspectives on mental pain that refer to pain as an emotional state, the difference between the perception we have of the ideal of our mind and what we really are, or defines pain as an unpleasant state of self-awareness that is about incompetence and self-despair and a form of emptiness due to the lack of meaning in life.

How does this mental pain lead to the creation of a work of art? Mental pain immerses us so profoundly in our thoughts that usually, with a bit of creativity and talent, newer and more innovative ways of expressing our feelings will come to mind. Furthermore, it is about our feelings and, in particular, we will be able to demonstrate what is going on inside us. And what is a better choice than art, which is sometimes more decisive in conveying meanings than words? If we think the pain causes creativity, we are wrong; Pain simply puts newer paths to the imagination in our minds. Art does not necessarily have to be sensible and meaningful, and this is the best feature of a dish in which our most abstract thoughts and ideas are to flow. A website called “Pain Exhibit” works in the field of collecting works whose main motivating factors are factors such as physical pain, psychology, or various mental illnesses. By going through these works, we realize that everyone’s definition of art depends on their worldview, which makes each work new and fresh, and each of them turns them into an independent narrator to narrate the tragedies of their creators.

How does the creation of art become a factor for the artist’s awareness again? In fact, the answer to this question turns the mentioned cycle from a series of simple linear steps into a repetitive cycle and connects the end of the cycle to the beginning of it. By producing art or reproducing his thoughts, the man proves his own identity and existence (at least to himself) and feels a sense of wholeness, ideological solidarity with the world, and improved self-esteem. Creating a work evokes the emotions of others, and when the artist’s words are heard and his impact on the audience is felt, it is as if he has taken on a mission that distinguishes him from an ordinary aware human being. With the public display of the work, the artist encounters people who have similar concerns and thoughts to him and will have a mirror of his mental path. Furthermore, as the most critical factor, art causes our pains, hidden worries, and deep thoughts to find a way out of the subconscious to enter the conscious realm, and this is a medicine to identify and alleviate our pain.

The man’s distance from the world of facts and devotion to truths and personality honesty leads to consciousness and self-awareness, which causes mental pain and makes the man sad, depressed and isolated until art as a savior, becomes responsible for his suffering and allows his thoughts to be revealed and the creation of the work takes place. The result is greater awareness, understanding, and knowledge.

The End
